Georgios Mantas Canon Part (track: Public Policy)
====================
Occupational Segregation from the Perspective of Social Norms
---------------------
Over the last years, it is apparent that women have increasingly managed to both enter in traditional male occupation  and increase their participation in the labour force and subsequently to the labour market. As a result, over the last years the gender pay gap has diminished significantly, especially during 1985 – 2000 (Blau F. and Kahn L., 2000).

Figure 1:
Women’s Median Annual Earnings as a Percentage of Men’s Median Annual Earnings for Full-Time, Year-Round Workers, 1960-201
graph_1 εικόνα 

Source: AAUW analysis of data from Proctor et al, U.S. Census Bureau, Income and Poverty in the United States 2015

Nonetheless, even after this considerable convergence between the wages of men and women the gender wage gap still remains a persistent global phenomenon. In addition, the relevant economic literature, based on the concurrent evidence, have highlighted that the pace of reduction of the gender wage gap have slowed down and it is more likely that the narrowing of the gender wage gap will not continue in the future ; considering also the impact of 2008 financial crises which destabilized the labour market and generally to the global economy. Thus, the persistent and distortive nature of the gender wage gap requires active policies and positive measures in order to enhance pay equity. However, in order to construct feasible and efficient policies, initially the sources and the reasons of the specific problem should be explored.

Before we proceed with the presentation of gender pay gap reasons, some economic terms have to be clarified by providing a few brief definitions. At first, the gender wage gap (or gender pay gap in the literature) measures the earnings differences between women and men in paid employment in the labour market. It is one of the many indicators of gender inequality in a country, when examining labour market participation in terms of gender (Education International., pp. 1). Secondly, the labour market refers to the supply and demand for labor, in which employees provide the supply and employers the demand. It is a major component of any economy, and is intricately tied in with markets for capital, goods and services . Namely, demand for labor is a concept that describes the amount of demand for labor that an economy or firm is willing to employ at a given point in time while, the labour supply is the number of hours people are willing and able to supply at a given wage rate. Finally, labor force is the number of individuals in an economy who either are employed or are seeking employment.

Gender Wage Gap and Occupational Segregation (Social Norms Perspective) 

The hitherto economic literature, in general, has identified two main reasons which contribute to the gender wage gap. The first one is the direct gender discrimination in the labour market and the second one is occupational (gender) segregation. In this chapter, our analysis will concentrate exclusively on the occupational segregation. Before, we proceed with the demonstration of the correlation between the gender wage gap and the occupational segregation; we have initially to provide a brief description of that term. Furthermore, ‘occupational or employment  segregation’ is an expression for the gendered division of labour in paid employment, where men and women are channeled into different types of occupational roles and tasks. Occupational segregations could vary by race, gender, generational cohorts (different generations of women which insert in the labour market), educational background and skill requirements. 

The economic literature takes into consideration diligently all these factors that could possibly affect the gender wage gap and have concluded that indeed occupational segregation constitutes a major contributor to that specific gap. Moreover, a careful look at the occupational segregation and gender earnings ratio implies that these two trends have an inverse correlation. The following graph is intuitive to fathom that kind of relation.

Figure 2:
Change in the index of Occupational Segregation and the Gender Earnings Ratio, 1979 to 2012
eikona 2
Source: Hegewisch A. and Hartmann H. 2014. “Occupational Segregation and the Gender Gap: A Job Half Done.”, Institute for Women’s Policy Research. pp. 12.

Hence, as the Index of Occupational Segregation diminishes and approaches zero, which means that the labour market becomes more occupationally integrated, then there is an improvement to the relative earnings of women with respect to the corresponding earnings of their male counterparts. 

Based on the hitherto literature analysis, it is apparent that the occupational segregation affects negatively the earnings of genders because it splits the labour market to predominantly male and female occupations where the females face a wage penalty when they working on predominantly female occupations. The term “wage penalty” means that female workers earn less money than their counterparts in jobs that require the exact same skills and responsibilities.

The aforementioned information is related with the part of the literature that tries to establish the occupational segregation with respect to various observable aspects that are related with the skills, educational level and preferences of women in the labour market. However, quite a few studies have underlined that “there is an unexplained residual which reflects gender discrimination” (Educational International. pp. 6). Therefore, the occupational segregation has to be examined by the spectrum of social norms or attitudes  which can trigger the occupational segregation to higher levels and eventually to widen further the gender wage gap. 

The first observed social norm that preserves this gender bias is connected with the parenthood of women. In particular, from their family environment girls are being taught that their duties are inextricably connected with taking care of the children. Moreover, the specific social norm not only affects the behavior of women by leading them to search primarily for part-time jobs when there are parental duties but also affects the education system and the basic public labour authorities which seem to channel women to relevant working areas with child care and children in general. Due to the above, gender integration is hindered across occupations and this ends up to a fundamental undervaluation of women’s work.

Secondly, it has to be mentioned that the employers cannot be unaffected by the specific social norm and respectively they adjust their behavior towards to female workers. More specifically, it is likely to consider women as “potential mothers” who will plausibly interrupt their careers. As consequence employers tend to give lower wages to female (both full-time and part-time) workers and in the same time they may not provide promotion opportunities . Therefore, it is profound how a social norm can contribute to the employers’ behavior and subsequently how that norm could create a norm of undervaluation of women’s work at the labour market and extensively to the whole society.

Feasible-potential tools-policies to reduce the occupational segregation

From the above description, it can be perceived that occupational segregation (from social norms’ channel or not) is positively related with gender wage gap. This relationship suggests that occupational segregation should continue to be the target of any policy effort to tackle the wage gap (Hegewisch A. and Hartmann H. 2014). However, the literature underlines that the various forms of occupational segregation are vague and this sector demands prudent actions (Educational International).


The economic literature provides various potential policies to integrate occupations in the labour market. At first, there are policies that target improving the earnings of female-dominated jobs. For instance, a (higher) minimum wage can be imposed to in female-dominated jobs or more sufficient parental leave  policies and paid sick days can be adopted (Hegewisch A. and Hartmann H. 2014).

Secondly, in order to augment occupational integration the policy-makers have to incentivize the private employers to redress pay inequalities and change their practices. This can be achieved either by imposing equal pay legislation or by assigning them to attend various studies  and seminars to perceive the actual value of women’s work. For instance, employers are more likely to reduce the barriers provide equal opportunities by adapting the work environment to suit in both genders . 

To sum up, the contemporary economic literature provides a few tools which are able to enhance occupational integration (either by the perspective of social norms or not) and subsequently, lessen the gender wage gap by leading the society to realize the actual value of women’s work and emphasizing on gender equality.

References
Blau F. and Kahn L. 2000. “Gender Differences in Pay”. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 14:4, pp.75 – 99.
BusinessDictionary. “Definition of labor force”, second definition: http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/labor-force.html 
Education International: “The Gender Pay Gap – reasons and implications”, second paper from the campaign “Pay Equity now”.
Hegewisch A. and Hartmann H. 2014. “Occupational Segregation and the Gender Gap: A Job Half Done.”, Institute for Women’s Policy Research.  
Investopedia. “DEFINITION of Labor Market”: http://www.investopedia.com/terms/l/labor-market.asp
